Introversion and extroversion are two fundamental personality traits that govern social interaction, determining how generally willing an individual is to socialise. Introversion is described as being shy, introspective and anxious while extroversion is described as being friendly and self-confident. These traits are likely developed during childhood similarly to other aspects of personality, and thus can be explained by cognitive or social development models such as those proposed by Jean Piaget, Erik Erikson, and Albert Bandura. However, they only begin to significantly influence behaviour in adolescence, where social interaction becomes more voluntary and complicated. By studying the buildup of these traits in childhood it is possible to see how they eventually condense and become ingrained in adolescence and continue to affect people throughout their lives as key tenets of identity.

Jean Piaget’s Theory of Cognitive Development categorises childhood into four phases based on the skills and perceptions shown by children at each stage. The most relevant stage to this essay is the Preoperational Stage shown in early childhood, and more specifically the Symbolic Function substage. During this substage children begin to participate in symbolic play, using imagination and letting some objects stand in for other items (symbolism). The nature of this symbolic play can be closely linked to the sociality level of the involved children (Dunn & Hughes, 2001), therefore showing a link to their introverted or extroverted tendencies. Based on the idea that symbolic play can show a link to introversion or extroversion, it is also possible to say that the influence of teachers or other adult figures in this stage could change the quality of play and therefore the sociality level of children (Dunn & Hughes, 2001). Piaget’s theory has some weaknesses because it stops at the age of twelve and therefore it is only possible to project how these developments might affect people later in their lives without any concrete basis for any potential speculation. Nevertheless, it provides valuable insight as to how sociality levels change through childhood and how antisocial tendencies are linked to introversion, while cooperative play is linked to extroversion.

Erik Erikson’s Theory of Psychosocial Development is dissimilar to Piaget’s Cognitive Theory in that it has much more potential for individual differences in development, and focuses on a longer period of time stretching beyond just childhood (Orenstein & Lewis, 2022). The effectiveness with which a child moves through the first few of Erikson’s eight stages of development could potentially shape their tendencies towards extroversion or introversion. Children who move successfully through the first stage, Trust vs Mistrust, are shown to have a secure attachment style as a result of their trusting nature (Martin et al., 2014). This attachment style encourages positive relationships and sociality and decreases their risk of social or emotional issues later in life, showing that moving through this stage successfully could make a child more self-confident and outgoing, two major traits of extroversion (Scarr, 1969). Another significant stage in this theory is the Identity vs Role Confusion stage. Adolescence is a period of significant identity development, and the Identity vs Role Confusion stage features the main challenge of developing a strong identity or giving in to peer pressure. A stronger identity at this stage would lend self-confidence and therefore extroverted traits; while a weaker identity would cause shyness, introspection and therefore introversion (Scarr, 1969). This stage is when extroverted or introverted tendencies fully settle, as the entirety of an adolescent’s identity is finally solidifying and sociality is an important part of this. From this stage onwards the traits of extroversion or introversion are mostly set in stone, rather than continuing to be externally influenced. As with any analysis based on Erikson, these ideas suffer from not taking biological factors into proper account and assuming that humans learn all behaviours and traits through experience (Taylor, 2018). Erikson’s theory successfully shows how extroversion and introversion are traits that can be developed over time and do not simply solidify when a child is young, as well as covering how they are important to development as a teenager and continue to impact people into their adult lives.

Social Learning Theory, as invented by Albert Bandura, is not strictly a developmental theory and therefore does not have distinct stages that are moved through with age. Instead, it proposes a model which claims that children learn behaviours by observing and then imitating (Rumjaun & Narod, 2020). Over time these behaviours become more natural and settle into habitual or personality traits. One such observable and imitable trait is extroversion, as naturally introverted children can become more sociable over time after observing their extroverted caretakers (Martin et al., 2014). The opposite does not occur with sociable children becoming more muted and introverted through the influence of their caretakers. It is also important to note that even basic social behaviours such as smiling and talking are learnt solely through exposure to caretakers performing such behaviours, which are then imitated by young children (Martin et al., 2014). Therefore, some of the shyness and anxiety characteristic of introversion may actually come from introverted caretakers not modelling social behaviours to their children effectively, leading the children to become more introverted due to a lack of social ability and knowledge. These conclusions would seem to imply that despite the possibility of being born with introverted tendencies, it is natural to grow towards extroversion over time. Bandura’s theory therefore explains how extroversion or introversion has its seeds sown both biologically and in very early childhood due to a combination of chance and parental input, but needs input from other theories to explain continued development over later stages of life.

Taking all of these theories together presents a view where Bandura’s Social Learning Theory explains the base level of extroversion or introversion in early childhood, Piaget’s Cognitive Development Theory explains how social or antisocial tendencies with imaginative play may influence these traits in early childhood, and Erikson’s Psychosocial Theory explains how struggles with identity influence sociality later in adolescence while expanding on the influence of caretakers in infanthood. This view of personality development focusing on sociality, which accounts for individual differences as well as base cognitive procedures and external input. One issue with this idea is that how much a person likes to socialise is not an inherently biological trait, but this can be disproved by looking at how babies exhibit distinct personalities early in life and before experiencing significant opportunities for experiential learning (Martin et al., 2014). Overall, these three theories in tandem produce a complete explanation for how the traits of extroversion and introversion are developed throughout childhood and adolescence.

Edgar Allan Poe likely held seriously derogatory views towards women, possibly viewing them as only important when useful to men, and he expressed these views through his writing. This can be seen through the fates of women in his stories, many of which only serve to advance the journey of the male main character. The trope of a female character only existing to meet a tragic fate to further the male main character’s journey is known as fridging or women in refrigerators (Callaghan, n.d.). Killing off a female character is not inherently bad, but doing it to specifically advance the journey of a male character while treating the female character as only a plot device to be discarded is a deeply misogynistic attitude that is shown in many of Poe’s works (Hone, 2019). It has been posited that Poe held very traditional views towards women, believing that they should not be educated and should be raised to become housewives, but it is unclear if this translated to more extreme views in private (Marchand, 1934). This essay will explore three of Poe’s texts and how they show a misogynistic attitude towards women.

Murders in the Rue Morgue is a short story by Edgar Allan Poe that shows misogyny through the treatment of the only two female characters, Madame L'Espanaye and Camille L’Espanaye (Perdue, 2023). These two characters are given no personality or importance in the story except to be murdered so the narrator, his friend Dupin and the police (all of whom are male) have a mystery to solve. The two women are independently wealthy due to Madame L'Espanaye who "told fortunes for a living" (Poe, 1829), a profession she is mocked for despite Dupin doing similar things with his powers of deductive reasoning. The two women are likely murdered by Poe as a punishment for having their own money and being happy without men, having evicted a male tenant in the past and choosing to live alone. The main reason their deaths can be considered a punishment is that the men responsible for the murder go unpunished (Limaye, 1998). Although some sources posit that the issue is that an orangutan does not face criminal liability, the true misogyny is in two facts of the story’s ending: firstly, that an animal commits the crime and therefore the true culprit cannot face justice, and second that the person responsible for the animal also does not face any kind of consequences (IPL, n.d.). Both of these facts could have been changed to make an ending that is more respectful to the murdered women. Therefore, Poe’s decision to publish the story with this ending reflects directly on his personal values.

The writing of Edgar Allan Poe’s story Berenice shows the same misogynistic attitudes as demonstrated in the above paragraph. Berenice is terribly hurt, her suffering serves only to benefit the male narrator, and she does not even receive the courtesy of being treated respectfully by the narrator, who posits that she is no longer the same person after her illness changes her “I knew her not --or knew her no longer as Berenice.” (Poe, 1835). Berenice is also treated unfairly by Poe, because the narrator’s illness excuses all his actions while Berenice’s arguably worse disease makes her the target of violence. Berenice being treated as a narrative device who only exists to suffer is made even worse than in Murders in the Rue Morgue because Berenice, being a more important character, has been routinely villainised and treated as a wicked seductress by male readers of the story (Belton, 1987). The last issue with Poe’s story Berenice is how clearly the titular character’s suffering is only intended to benefit the narrator, who is not in any way attracted to her before she becomes sick (Doyle, 1993). This makes Berenice an even more egregious display of misogyny from Poe because Berenice is not even treated as a person before her illness, only being a contrast who shows how sickly the narrator is, while the two women in Murders in the Rue Morgue are given mentions of independent lives outside their roles in the story.

Ligeia is the third short story by Edgar Allan Poe that will be explored in this essay. The most obvious target of misogyny in this story is the titular character Ligeia who, like Berenice, is at first glance the main focal point of the story. As such, Ligeia is only a plot device to cause the narrator’s depression and opium addiction (Hone, 2019).  Her only traits shown in the story are the traits that the narrator values about her, namely her beauty and extreme intelligence “There is one dear topic, however, on which my memory fails me not. It is the person of Ligeia.” (Poe, 1838) Even this intelligence is considered to be inhuman or unfeminine “such as I have never known in woman” (Poe, 1838), suggesting that Poe believed that educated women could not be women at all because of how traditional his view of the world was (Johanyak, 1995). There is also the issue of the narrator’s second wife, Lady Rowena. Some posit that she suffers an even worse fate than Ligeia, as not only does she die but her death is a vessel for the resurrection of Ligeia. Similarly, while Ligeia only recites a poem before dying, Lady Rowena does not talk at all before her untimely fate. The treatment of Ligeia and Lady Rowena is evidence of a pattern of writing in Poe’s stories, where female characters are not given character traits outside of their simple roles in the story while the narrator receives deep character analysis due to the construction of the narrative.

Edgar Allan Poe’s views towards women, as seen through his own words, show that he believed they should not be educated and should serve as housewives (Marchand, 1934). However, the views expressed through his writing are stronger and imply that he considered women to be naturally intellectually inferior to men, shown by his writing that intelligent women were not even human. Poe also expressed in his stories the view that women exist only to be convenient to men, because all the women in his stories serve only as plot devices. Taking into account all of Poe’s works it is easy to posit that his private misogynistic views were quite extreme and stretched beyond what he publicly stated.

A fandom is a fan community dedicated to a piece of media such as a book, television show, movie, or even a franchise that contains all of those media types in one collective universe. Star Trek was one of the first media properties to generate a large-scale fandom, and was in many ways the blueprint for how these communities formed and operated. By defining the Star Trek fandom as a subculture by sociological standards, examining the trends in this subculture and analysing the culture of fandoms as a collective it is possible to examine how this influential subculture has impacted society.
A subculture is a sociological term for a community within a larger society that shares some traits and beliefs and fulfils a set of requirements that prove its existence as a separate culture. These traits are unique norms and values, jargon, distinct channels of mass communication, leadership qualities, style and fad expression, pride in the group status, status criteria, and institutionalism of needs (Sebald, 1975). Clear examples of these traits in the Star Trek fandom are the creation of fanzines (a contraction of fan and magazine), a type of amateur fandom-focused magazine that were created by members of the fandom and distributed widely, as a form of mass communication. Pride in the group status and status criteria are also clearly visible as you could only be a member of the subculture if you watched and enjoyed Star Trek: The Original Series and these so-called ‘Trekkies’ identified themselves as such proudly. Even unique style expression can be seen in cosplay (a contraction of costume and play), where Trekkies dressed in costumes resembling the characters from the show to attend conventions. The unique norms and values of the Star Trek fandom as seen above are heavily influenced by its roots as a subculture founded by marginalised women, a past that is most clearly visible in the fanzines created with content from mothers stuck at home all day and writing or drawing with their ample free time. 

Some theories of sociology consider subcultural identities to be constructed rather than given, and that is clearly shown in the Star Trek fandom (Bennett, 1999). Instead of being labelled as part of a subculture on the basis of a natural shared trait (gender, race, class background, etc.) this subculture was constructed by the members and group affiliation was voluntary. Social connection was important to early Star Trek fans, who were often women and consequently excluded from Science Fiction spaces on the basis of gender. This is an example of Conflict Theory, as the existing male fanbase of science fiction was more powerful and female Star Trek fans attempted to form their own community to achieve power. Within the Star Trek fandom and fanzines they found a space to discuss issues such as race, gender and sexuality at a time when this was often difficult for women, particularly women of colour (Guerrier, 2018). This shows an important Functionalist value of subcultures being expressed, as these subcultural spaces were providing a clear purpose that was not otherwise met. Group memberships of this sort are an important part of identity and would have provided a unifying facet of identity to the involved fans (Ferdman, 2000). The Star Trek fandom was a very strongly constructed and unified group, as shown by the massive letter-writing campaign launched in 1967 that was successful in preventing the cancellation of Star Trek for long enough for it to become syndicated instead (Jindra, 1994). The most important trait of the Star Trek fandom, however, is arguably the warm attitude it had towards its members and new fans, a trait that to this day is uncommon in fandoms.
The Star Trek fandom has had a massive impact on the landscape of modern fandom and how fan communities operate, even in the internet era. Despite no longer relying on fanzines and letter writing to communicate, basic tenets of fandom that can easily be taken for granted can in actuality be traced back to the Star Trek fandom. It has popularised mainstays of fandom such as the popularity of fanzines, physical conventions that cater to only one fandom and not an entire genre, and fan-created media such as short stories and artwork (Guerrier, 2018). Nevertheless, the most noticeable impact of Star Trek is in how it changed the attitude of creators towards fan contributions. It normalised publicly available fanfiction and fanart and close interaction with creators through fanzines and working closely with the creator of Star Trek, Gene Roddenberry, to organise conventions and stop the show from being cancelled. Star Trek fandom also invented two of the biggest tropes in fanfiction today, namely the phrasing of ‘slash shipping’ to refer to stories that paired two same-sex characters in a romantic relationship, and the term ‘Mary Sue’ to refer to the badly written and cliche characters that often starred in fanfictions (Guerrier, 2018). This precedent was important in the early days of public fandom in establishing that so-called ‘transformative works’ were valid ways to use source material and that as long as no money is being made from fan content, it is not a breach of copyright laws. Without these contributions, modern fandom culture would look very different and likely be a lot stricter on the creation of unlicensed fan content, to the detriment of fan enjoyment. However, it’s possible that this is actually an overall negative effect as it does not show the full level of respect towards authors that is intended by copyright lawmakers, and makes it easier for fans to steal an author’s work and use it for their own purposes.
The fandom of Star Trek thus clearly qualifies as a subculture under sociological standards due to having different communication channels, forms of dress and expression, status criteria and values than the culture surrounding it. Additionally, it has had a marked impact on how modern fandoms operate and when it originated, provided an important forum space and community to people who were disadvantaged on the basis of gender and often race. This fandom has persisted to this day because of how dedicated the fans are to Star Trek and to each other, and their dedication is a vital part of how Star Trek has had such longevity as a media series and been translated into so many mediums. Without the vital contributions of original Star Trek fans and the continued efforts of people who have joined this subculture more recently the property would not have had this level of success, showing the strength and impact of the Star Trek fandom subculture.

Angela Carter’s 1979 collection of fairy tale-inspired short stories entitled The Bloody Chamber included an adaptation of Little Red Riding Hood entitled The Company of Wolves. This is a feminist reimagining where the titular character has more control over her own fate, as well as including more overtly sexual themes than even the 1697 version by Charles Perrualt that served as a cautionary tale for young girls. The contrast between the two stories is particularly clear when it comes to the aspect of agency, with Perrault shaming the young girl’s decisions while Carter treats them with weight and importance. Carter’s attempt to give the character of Little Red Riding Hood more autonomy somewhat successfully destabilises Perrault’s message that Little Red’s choices were what caused her untimely fate, but is ultimately confined by the limits of the story Carter is adapting.

Little Red Riding Hood is a fairy tale that has been adapted countless times, usually as a moral lesson for children. It was originally passed down through an oral tradition, which led to countless regional variants that contributed in varying degrees to Charles Perrault’s original written interpretation (Verdier, 1997). In many of these stories she is diverted from her path by childish distractions such as flowers or butterflies, and this is shown to be a moral flaw, which is what causes the wolf to overtake her and reach her grandmother’s cottage first (Vaz da Silva, 2016). In many oral variations, the wolf offers her a choice between two paths and it is implied that the one she chooses is relevant to the wolf beating her. However, different oral traditions exist in which she picks the other path and is still eaten (Vaz da Silva, 2016). This exemplifies how the choices Little Red Riding Hood makes are largely irrelevant despite how they are portrayed as markers of morality, because the core idea of the story requires the wolf to reach the cottage before her. Similarly, the version of Little Red shown in The Company Of Wolves is given a choice by the wolf who proposes that he will trod through the undergrowth, while she will take the paved path. This version is unique in that her route is the one deemed safe and while she dawdles, she is not said to have left the path. This means that she has picked what is written and considered to be the moral decision (Verdier, 1997), but the wolf still wins. This is the inevitable outcome of her story, because the tragedy in it is that it would not be the same story if he didn’t get there first.

The myth of Orpheus and Eurydice details the tale of a man who loses his lover to the Underworld and attempts to bring her back, on the condition that he cannot look back as he leads her back to the surface. Because it is a story designed to be retold, their tragic tale is made to play out every time and yet must always end the same. Despite the many chances for the story to diverge, it will never do so because that would change the essence of the story (Rush, 2022). Similarly, an adaptation of Little Red Riding Hood where the wolf does not eat her grandmother loses the essence of the story it is adapting (Verdier, 1997). Little Red Riding Hood is doomed from the second that she steps into the woods and begins her journey, a theme that is conveyed through Carter’s writing “The forest closed upon her like a pair of jaws.” (Carter, 1979/2006, p. 114). It is additionally foreshadowed by the attire of the titular heroine, as red often symbolises blood and is undeniably reminiscent of the blood the wolf will take from her (Vaz da Silva, 2007). This red shawl is the other integral part of Little Red Riding Hood’s story, along with her grandmother’s death, and cannot be removed without fundamentally altering the story (Vaz da Silva, 2016). Therefore, this tragic symbolism and her ultimate fate also cannot be removed. This inevitability disrupts the moralising message of Perrault’s original text, by showing that Little Red’s choices never would have made a difference to her fate.

Perrault’s text is destabilised by Carter’s adaptation, but has its own strengths as well. In Carter’s version, Little Red Riding Hood is given autonomy in name only through the narration “It is the worst time in all the year for wolves but this strong-minded child insists she will go off through the wood.” (Carter, 1979/2006, p. 112), but is actually presented with very few opportunities for choice. After the wolf inevitably beats her to the house, her only choices are regarding her own mental framing of events, because the objective fact of what the wolf does to her is not within her control. Little Red is not empowered to take control of her own destiny, but instead only to justify what happens to her by convincing herself that it is her choice, a point of view that is reflected in the narration (Bidisha, 2016). This is a key difference between the two stories, because while Perrault’s version has a moralising lecture at the end that frames young women as not knowing any better than to be preyed on “Children, especially attractive, well bred young ladies, should never talk to strangers, for if they should do so, they may well provide dinner for a wolf.” (Perrault, 1889, p. 2). By framing the narration in a way that makes Little Red sound empowered “as she freely gave the kiss she owed him” (Carter, 1979/2006, p. 118), Carter attempts to make the story a feminist tale of liberation. This destabilises the patronising narrative of Perrault’s tale, but in doing so misses the empathy he gave to women who are taken advantage of.

Charles Perrault’s original written version of Little Red Riding Hood was empathetic towards young girls who fall for the charades of wolves, but expressed this in a patronising way that does not allow the titular character any agency. This is destabilised by Angela Carter’s reimagining of the tale that shows a bold and decisive protagonist, but the message of this reimagining ultimately falls flat due to the nature of the Little Red Riding Hood story. Whether the titular character is given control over her decisions or not, the story is required to end the same way or it will not be the same story. Carter’s reimagining is a creative response to the issues with the original text, but becomes confined by the limits of the story she is adapting.

Oscar Wilde uses the play The Importance of Being Earnest to highlight and explore the hypocrisy and self-centred attitudes that were common among the Victorian upper class. It particularly focuses on the ridiculous attitudes prevalent in the culture of the time surrounding marriage and how the Victorian upper class was duplicitous and selfish in their treatment of other people. Oscar Wilde may have been angry or resentful towards the upper class he was surrounded by because of how their shallow values meant that he was only ostracised for cheating on his wife because it was with a man. This may have also increased the negativity of his view towards their attitudes about marriage, which are heavily satirised and mocked in the Importance of Being Earnest. Good marriages were highly valued among upper class families in the Victorian Era because of how they could advance the family’s wealth and social status (Appell, 2009). One character in particular, Lady Bracknell, represents this business-like attitude towards marriage as well as self-centredness and hypocrisy by being against marrying for money despite having done the same “But I do not approve of mercenary marriages. When I married Lord Bracknell I had no fortune of any kind. But I never dreamed for a moment of allowing that to stand in my way.” (Oscar Wilde, 1895, Pg 79). However, all of the four main characters of the play show these traits in many aspects of their lives, especially marriage.

The first and most obviously satirical character I want to talk about is Algernon. His attitude towards marriage is more cynical than most characters in the play “I thought you had come up for pleasure? . . . I call that business.” (Oscar Wilde, 1895, Pg 8) and may most closely resemble Oscar Wilde’s own views. However, Algernon also has the most over the top and unrealistic personality and dialogue. This means that his lines cannot be read completely straight, more than most characters in the play. It also makes Algernon one of the most hypocritical and selfish characters in the play, second only to Jack. Algernon does not respect other people’s time or wishes, which is shown when he eats the sandwiches he ordered for his aunt “Please don’t touch the cucumber sandwiches. They are ordered specifically for Aunt Augusta.” (Oscar Wilde, 1895, Pg 8). He also doesn’t care how his actions, such as Bunburying, may impact the people around him. Algernon has a very light-hearted attitude towards life and lying (Sparknotes, n.d.) and only cares about how much fun he can have with his freedom. This is shown by the fact that he invented a name for his deception and in his comments to Jack “I have invented an invaluable permanent invalid called Bunbury, in order that I may be able to go down into the country whenever I choose.” (Oscar Wilde, 1895, Pg 14). When Algernon finds out that Jack also Bunburies, he encourages Jack to continue it after being married to Gwendolen “Nothing will induce me to part with Bunbury, and if you ever get married, which seems to me extremely problematic, you will be very glad to know Bunbury. A man who marries without knowing Bunbury has a very tedious time of it.” (Oscar Wilde, 1895, Pg 15) with no care to how it might hurt Gwendolen, his cousin. The last part of that quote, along with his next line “Then your wife will. You don’t seem to realise, that in married life three is company and two is none.” (Oscar Wilde, 1895, Pg 15), also highlight Algernon’s clinical attitude when it comes to marriage and romance.

Jack is the other male lead in the Importance of Being Earnest. His hypocrisy and selfish attitude are more hidden, but are shown when he is forced to speak honestly or confront the consequences of his actions. He could be argued to be a worse liar than Algernon, because he is unable to be honest with himself or with his friend about why he Bunburies or even that he does it at all “I’m not a Bunburyist at all.” (Oscar Wilde, 1895, Pg 15). Jack claims that his Bunburying is moral and just, as opposed to Algernon’s “My dear Algy, I don’t know whether you will be able to understand my real motives. You are hardly serious enough.” (Oscar Wilde, 1895, Pg 13) and hides it behind the excuse of having to set a good example for his ward Cecily. This makes him more deceitful than Algernon, who is completely honest about and aware of why he Bunburies and even made rules for how to do it properly. Jack claims that he would have no need for Earnest in his marriage to Gwendolen, but also only wants to kill Earnest so that Cecily will stop enquiring after him “I’ll kill him in any case. Cecily is a little too much interested in him.” (Oscar Wilde, 1895, Pg 15). This could show a lack of respect for Gwendolen’s feelings towards him, because Jack is not concerned about how his deceit and escapism could hurt her. Because of the phrasing of this conversation, it could be assumed that Jack would continue to Bunbury in marriage if it benefited him and Cecily wouldn’t be a problem.

Cecily and Gwendolen, the love interests, show their dishonesty in a different and potentially less obvious form. Instead of creating a fictional friend or brother to visit, they are only rude to each other behind the guise of polite conversation ‘It would distress me more than I can tell you, dear Gwendolen, if it caused you any mental or physical anguish, but I feel bound to point out that since Earnest proposed to you he clearly has changed his mind’ (Oscar Wilde, 1895, Pg 61). This is especially clear when servants are present, as seen in this stage direction “Cecily is about to retort. The presence of the servants exercises a restraining influence, under which both girls chafe.” (Oscar Wilde, 1895, Pg 62). The above conversation takes place during a tea party hosted in Cecily’s garden. Cecily and Gwendolen converse politely as Cecily serves Gwendolen tea. However, Gwendolen makes jabs at Cecily’s upbringing “I am glad to say I have never seen a spade. It is obvious that our social spheres have been wildly different.” (Oscar Wilde, 1895, Pg 62) and says that she is out of touch with high society “Cake is rarely seen in the best houses nowadays.” (Oscar Wilde, 1895, Pg 63), This causes Cecily to enact her revenge by ignoring Gwendolen’s dietary requests and serving her sugary tea and cake. The two women find out that they are both engaged to who they believe to be the same person, which makes them quickly retract their earlier promises of friendship “From the moment I saw you I distrusted you. I felt that you were false and deceitful. I am never deceived in such matters. My first impressions of people are invariably right.” (Oscar Wilde, 1895, Pg 64). Cecily and Gwendolen are a particularly good example of hypocrisy in the Importance of Being Earnest. They treat other people, including each other, differently for offences that they have also committed. In the tea party scene, this is obvious when they both hate each other for being engaged to Earnest. Cecily also has a line in the third act that shows this attitude “I am not punctual myself, I know, but I do like it in others.” (Oscar Wilde, 1895, Pg 82). I think that this attitude comes from a lack of self-awareness due to a sheltered upbringing rather than a hurtful attitude towards other people.

The different characters in the Importance of Being Earnest show different aspects of the hypocrisy and shallow values of the Victorian upper class. It is important to note that Cecily and Gwendolen are less fleshed out, which means that they have very similar roles and attitudes in the story. The character of Algernon shows willful harm and deceit towards other people because of an inability and unwillingness to put himself in other people’s shoes. Jack shows a more reserved kind of deceit, hidden behind a facade of being a model citizen. Cecily and Gwendolen show self-centredness and blindness towards the emotions of others, as well as anger hidden behind a shield of politeness. Together, these characters are used to satirise Victorian attitudes towards marriage and display anger towards the upper class.

European colonisation permanently changed how Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people live due to dispossession, forced cultural appropriation and violence. European settlers forcibly displaced the Aboriginal inhabitants of Australia from their native lands and their homes, causing a loss of connection to land. They kidnapped children from their families (Australians Together 2022) and forced Aboriginal people to give up their culture and become Christian to survive. European colonists also committed horrible acts of violence against Aboriginal inhabitants that were often orchestrated by the government (Allam & Evershed 2022). This essay will explore how all of these crimes impacted how Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders lived and continue to live in the present day.

Aboriginal and other First Nations people were forced off their land by the European settlers (Knight 1839). They had been on this continent for thousands, if not millions, of years before European colonists sailed over. This means that they had their own knowledge of how to take care of the land and protect it from natural disasters and environmental decay. However, the European settlers prioritised their own food supplies and quick housing over taking care of the environment. They ignored Aboriginal knowledge which has contributed to climate change and global warming, a problem that we continue to face today. European settlers brought over invasive animals (Invasive Species in Australia n.d.) and chopped down trees for housing and farmland with no thought for the damage it caused. Many of their favourite farm animals such as cows compacted the soil when they walked and others, such as feral cats, killed native animals. Even invasive plants ruined soil quality and choked out native plants. Aboriginal people had nowhere to live even on their own continent and were forced to watch as the settlers destroyed their traditional land (Earle 1826). Many Aboriginal people are either homeless or consider themselves to be so because of disconnection from country (Dodson 1996) up to the present day.

Somewhere between 10 and 33 percent of First Nations children were removed from their families between the years of 1910 and 1970, according to the Bringing Them Home report (Australians Together 2022). These children (known as the Stolen Generation) were not allowed to contact their families or communities and were usually banned from speaking their first languages and were only allowed to speak English. This led to a loss of language and culture both for the children who were taken and also for their children, who couldn’t be taught their cultural heritage. Cultural identity and language are important for cultural connection and general wellbeing, as well as self-esteem (Marmion, Obata & Troy 2014). This is particularly important for Aboriginal people and their children because many Aboriginal languages don’t have a written alphabet and are only perpetuated through oral traditions. The stolen children did not receive a proper education (Australians Together 2022) and were expected to do low-level jobs that required very little thinking or training. They also often had their wages stolen or withheld (Photo 2013) which contributed to the economic inequality towards Aboriginal people that persists to the present day. The national apology by Kevin Rudd in 2008 (National Museum Australia 2009) was a formal apology for the Stolen Generation and a step towards reconciliation, as is the fact that these topics are now a part of the formalised Australian curriculum.

Possibly the worst crime against First Nations people in Australia was the systematic genocide that took the population “from 1-1.5 million before invasion to less than 100,000 by the early 1900s” (Sentance 2020). The Stolen Generation was part of this genocide, by forcibly assimilating Aboriginal children into white society in an attempt to speed up the decline of the Aboriginal population (Australians Together 2022). The other way this genocide was committed was through massacres. Around half of the massacres had police participation (Allam & Evershed 2022) which shows how systemic and widely accepted the violence was. 270 massacres (defined as killings of more than 6 defenceless people) happened in 140 years of early Australian history (Sentance 2020). Smaller massacres of less than six people still happened up to 1981 (Allam 2022). At least at first, the massacres often occurred under the pretence of settlers defending themselves against Aboriginal people (Mundy, G.C. 1852), but were actually because of racist hatred or a desire to wipe out Aboriginal people. There were rarely any consequences for the massacres because the government was complicit (Allam 2022) and actively passed laws that proposed to let the Aboriginal population die out in what they considered to be natural selection (Australians Together 2022).

First Nations people and the world would be better off in the present day if not for the crimes of colonists in the early days of Australia. Aboriginal people were kicked off their land and had to give up taking care of it, which means that Australia’s land has been permanently damaged and continues to be damaged by farm animals, mining and large-scale farming. Aboriginal children were regularly kidnapped from their families and forced to assimilate into European society. They were cut off from their communities, which has had permanent effects on them and their children or grandchildren. Less than ten percent of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders on the 2016 census reported speaking a First Nations language at home (Australian Bureau of Statistics 2022). This is less than in 1991 when it was just over sixteen percent. There was also systematic violence and genocide against Aboriginal people that was often supported, either tacitly or openly, by the government and police (Allam & Evershed 2022). These actions severely reduced the Aboriginal population and permanently economically disadvantaged the First Nations community.

Shakespeare’s Macbeth is a tragedy that shows themes of the supernatural, fate and free will, ambition, and madness. The play follows the titular character of Macbeth as he ascends to great power through unsavoury means and then falls from his throne and into hell just as quickly. Macbeth is encouraged and egged on by his wife, Lady Macbeth, who experiences a similar downfall and death for her part in Macbeth’s rise to power. The theme of fate or destiny and the extent to which any life can be predetermined is a major theme in this play, and can be clearly seen through the characters of Macbeth and Lady Macbeth. Macbeth and Lady Macbeth’s different beliefs about the power of destiny versus making your own path in life are directly connected to the ways in which they both die.

Macbeth strongly believes in fate and considers many aspects of his own life to be predetermined, whereas Lady Macbeth believes that prophecies will not come true without the active participation of the people they affect. This is shown in their different reactions to the prophecies Macbeth receives from the three witches he meets at the beginning of the play. Macbeth believes that if their prophecies, which are that he will become the Thane of Glamis and then the king, are to come true, he may not have to do anything “If chance will have me king, why, chance may crown me without my stir.” (Act 1, Scene 3, Lines 157-159).  This is contrasted by Lady Macbeth, who believes that, despite the prophecies her husband tells her about, he will not come to power without taking control of his own destiny “Thou wouldst be great, art not without ambition, but without the illness should attend it.” (Act 1, Scene 5, Lines 18-20). She may believe that it may be possible for him to eventually become king without foul play, shown when she says that Macbeth will be unable “To catch the nearest way.” (Act 1, Scene 5, Line 18), meaning that he won’t be able to take the shortest path to power rather than saying he will not become king at all. However, Lady Macbeth still decides that it is important to engage in underhanded tactics “Hie thee hither, that I may pour my spirits in thine ear and chastise with the valor of my tongue all that impedes thee from the golden round.” (Act 1, Scene 5, Lines 28-31) which could show hesitation in her belief.

Macbeth is motivated by his belief in the power of the prophecies to kill King Duncan. The idea would likely have never occurred to him without the interference of the witches “All hail, Macbeth, that shalt be king hereafter!” (Act 1, Scene 3, Line 53), which is backed up by how appalled Macbeth initially seems towards the idea of killing King Duncan “If good, why do yield to that suggestion whose horrid image doth unfix my hair and make my seated heart knock at my ribs against the use of nature?” (Act 1, Scene 3, Lines 147-150). Macbeth seems to believe in the power of the prophecies to make him king “Glamis and Thane of Cawdor! The greatest is behind.” (Act 1, Scene 3, Lines 125-126) and believes wholeheartedly that the prophecies are going to guide his life in the right direction “Two truths are told as happy prologues to the swelling act of the imperial theme.” (Act 1, Scene 3, Lines 140-142). He is briefly concerned about Banquo’s advice that the prophecies may be intended to lead him to ruin “And oftentimes, to win us to our harm, the instruments of darkness tell us truths, win us with honest trifles, to betray’s in deepest consequence.” (Act 1, Scene 3, Lines 135-138) but then decides that it will be safest to let the prophecies play out without his interference “If chance will have me king, why, chance may crown me without my stir.” (Act 1, Scene 3, Lines 157-159).

Macbeth’s faith in the prophecies only becomes stronger throughout the play, as more of the witches' predictions seem to come true and benefit him. He becomes the Thane of Cawdor without any work, just as the witches predicted “All hail, Macbeth! Hail to thee, Thane of Cawdor!” (Act 1, Scene 3, Line 52) and then becomes king after killing King Duncan. King of Scotland was an elected position, chosen by the thanes, so it wasn’t certain that Macbeth would get the position. Macbeth almost seems to require the prophecies for guidance, because once he becomes king he immediately seeks out the witches for further advice “I conjure you by that which you profess (howe’er you come to know it), answer me.” (Act 4, Scene 1, Lines 51-52). Macbeth’s sanity has declined severely by this point in the play, leading him to kill Macduff’s entire family and all his servants “The castle of Macduff I will surprise, seize upon Fife, give to th’ edge o’ th’ sword his wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls that trace him in his line.” (Act 4, Scene 1, Lines 171-174) because the prophecies tell him that Macduff is a threat to him “Macbeth! Beware Macduff! Beware the Thane of Fife!” (Act 4, Scene 1, Lines 81-82). Macbeth leaves every important decision in his life up to the power of prophecy.

Even when Macbeth’s actions catch up to him and he is surrounded by enemies, he leaves his life entirely to the power of fate. The apparitions summoned by the witches told him that he can only die if two seemingly impossible conditions are met: that Birnam Wood rises up against him “Macbeth shall never vanquished be until Great Birnam Wood to high Dunsinane Hill shall come against him.” (Act 4, Scene 1, Lines 105-107) and that someone who is not born of woman come to kill him “Laugh to scorn the power of man, for none of woman born shall harm Macbeth.” (Act 4, Scene 1, Lines 90-92). Macbeth makes decisions that those around him consider unwise because of his blind faith in the power of fate “We learn no other but the confident tyrant keeps still in Dunsinane and will endure our setting down before ’t.” (Act 5, Scene 4, Lines 11-13). This belief leads Macbeth to his death, as he refuses to run because he doesn’t believe that a person not born of woman will challenge him “I bear a charmèd life, which must not yield to one of woman born.” (Act 5, Scene 8, Lines 15-16). Macbeth might have been able to survive if he hadn’t stayed put in Dunsinane castle and had instead fled the country and given up the throne. But instead he dies in a way that was perfectly foretold and fated, matching his unwavering belief in the power of fate.

Lady Macbeth, on the other hand, takes her life and death into her own hands. She doesn’t seem to believe in the power of the prophecies nearly as strongly or fervently as Macbeth does, instead choosing to focus on how to achieve the goals presented to her “Thou wouldst be great, art not without ambition, but without the illness should attend it.” (Act 1, Scene 5, Lines 18-20). Lady Macbeth experiences a similar mental decline to Macbeth over the course of the play, culminating in her suicide “His fiend-like queen (who, as ’tis thought, by self and violent hands, took off her life).” (Act 5, Scene 8, Lines 82-84). Her death can be assumed to be caused by the secret guilt she shows over her actions ”What, will these hands ne’er be clean? No more o’ that, my lord, no more o’ that. You mar all with this starting.” (Act 5, Scene 1, Lines 45-47). This guilt is caused, either directly or indirectly, by her own actions. She was the one who guided and pushed Macbeth to kill King Duncan “You shall put this night’s great business into my dispatch, which shall to all our nights and days to come give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.” (Act 1, Scene 6, Lines 79-82) and her actions have clearly been weighing on her “Yet who would have thought the old man to have had so much blood in him?” (Act 5, Scene 1, Lines 41-42). Lady Macbeth also talks of the murder of Banquo and the slaughter of Macduff’s household “The Thane of Fife had a wife. Where is she now?” (Act 5, Scene 1, Lines 44-45), two crimes which Macbeth only commited because she had awakened his true murderous spirit. This means that her suicide can be presumed to be caused by guilt over crimes she either committed or caused, making it a truly self-determined death.

The characters of Macbeth and Lady Macbeth show the theme of fate and free will through their lives and deaths. Macbeth’s life is guided by the power of prophecy whereas Lady Macbeth is focused on her goals and what she needs to do to achieve them. Lady Macbeth’s death is caused by guilt over her actions, and she shows free will when she decides to take her death into her own hands and commit suicide. This is a clear contrast to Macbeth’s firm determination to die according to his destiny “Till Birnam Wood remove to Dunsinane I cannot taint with fear.” (Act 5, Scene 3, Lines 2-3) instead of on his own terms “Why should I play the Roman fool and die on mine own sword? Whiles I see lives, the gashes do better upon them.” (Act 5, Scene 8, Lines 1-3). Ultimately, one dies through her own free will surrounded by chains she created for herself and the other dies a fated death chained by destiny.

In this essay, I will explore how online communities centred around toxic masculinity and the alpha male ideology are similar to historical cults in their use of loneliness, insecurity, and emotional vulnerability to indoctrinate new victims. Toxic masculinity and alpha male ideology are terms usually used online to refer to particular groups of people. People who identify as alpha males usually display toxic masculinity (Macarol, 2023). Toxic masculinity is characterized by homophobia, sexism, a need for control (particularly over women), rejecting ‘feminine’ work like household chores, having many sexual partners, violence, not showing emotions other than anger, and aggression towards women that often manifests as sexual harassment or assault (Vallie, 2022). The term alpha male originates from the study of animals, particularly primates, where social groups are run by an ‘alpha’ (Singal, 2016). This concept has been applied to humanity by many men eager to run their corner of the world, particularly in a way that oppresses and discriminates against women. They often use podcasts and YouTube channels to spread their ideologies to more people.

Andrew Tate is one famous example of an alpha male. He is an online influencer and celebrity who is famous for his sexist, racist and homophobic views and appeals to people who are interested in being outside the mainstream (Das, 2022). Tate has also recently been charged with rape and human trafficking, accusations that are supported by his online rhetoric against women such as saying that rape victims ‘bear responsibility’ (BBC News, 2023). Andrew Tate and other alpha males like Kevin Samuels often hide behind the idea that they are championing men’s rights and fighting the problems that men face in society, when they’re really trying to oppress anyone who isn’t a heterosexual white man. Toxic masculinity and the alpha male mindset may be propagated over the internet but they can still have serious impacts in real life. Many women have been upset to find that men they trusted such as their brothers, fathers and partners have become aggressive, sexist and homophobic because of content by people like Andrew Tate (Onibada, 2022). This leads to people feeling threatened, ending relationships and feeling worse about themselves because of the way they are treated by people they care about.

Cult recruitment tactics have historically relied heavily on isolating the recruits from the outside world and from anyone who criticises the cult (Stein, 2017). However, in the internet age it’s difficult to achieve total isolation from the outside world. Instead, modern cults double down on the isolationist ideas that are common in cults to make the recruits believe that only the cult can be trusted and anyone outside the cult is a member of some conspiracy trying to harm the recruit (Nast, 2021). Modern-day cults now commonly use the internet to find new recruits who are emotionally vulnerable (Norman, 2017), a method that is similar to the ways alpha male podcasts, websites and YouTube accounts can suck people in. 

Many of the men who are indoctrinated into alpha male groups feel lonely and have low self-esteem. Alpha male ideologies can also be similar to incel ideologies, because the men who propagate these ideas blame women for their lack of romantic success and for picking the ‘wrong men’ to date (Anti-Defamation League, 2022). To incels, the wrong men are people who aren’t as ‘nice’ as the incels, generally just people who don’t think that being nice means that they should be rewarded with sex (Sweeney, 2023), and to alpha males the wrong people are ‘beta males’ who aren’t as assertive and therefore less ‘manly’ and masculine. Both of these ideologies emphasise the idea that men are not responsible for their own problems and can blame the world, or women specifically, instead. This tactic is reminiscent of cult tactics and conspiracy theories that also work to separate their victims from the rest of the world.

The tactics used by proponents of the alpha male ideology and toxic masculinity are similar to the tactics used by cults to gain new recruits. These tactics focus on isolation from criticism and cultivating a sense of being better than the rest of the world (Stein, 2017). Many of the people who have had their loved ones fall prey to alpha male ideas have noticed that their loved ones have begun saying things like “This man is speaking the truth, no one else speaks like this.” and saying that the alpha male influencers are the only ones who understand them (Onibada, 2022). This has clear similarities to the cultivated dependence cult recruits are expected to have towards their cult leaders. However, cults tend to have more stories of people waking up and leaving the cult. This may be because cult manipulation tactics are less effective, because cults are more common, or because of how normalized sexism and homophobia are in our society, therefore making these ideas seem less harmful than the ones usually pushed by cults. Regardless, both of these tactics can be incredibly effective and harmful in changing a person’s thoughts and should be protected and defended against.

R. L. Stevenson’s Jekyll and Hyde conveys societal unrest about the rise of science that contradicted the popular religious beliefs of the time and the connection between science, the supernatural, and immoral behaviour. This can be seen in many items of gothic literature from the Victorian era, which tend to reflect a fear of change and scientific progress taking humanity away from their religious and moral ways. For example, Frankenstein is one of the most widely known science fiction stories of all time and features the creation of new life, previously a role reserved for God alone, by a human using science (Bartleby, n.d.). Gothic literature has always served as a form of social commentary and Stevenson used Jekyll and Hyde to explore this societal anxiety around science and the rapid changing of Victorian society that was underway at the time.

In Victorian times the term ‘supernatural’ was used to describe a much broader category of things than would be typical today (Barrett, 2012a), and applied to many common pseudoscientific ideas as well as directly magical occurrences. One of these ideas was the concept of Atavism, as created by Cesare Lombroso, which posited that criminals were characterised by barbaric traits that had otherwise evolved out of humanity as a whole (Williamson, 2018). Hyde is described in terms reminiscent of atavistic beliefs “He must be deformed somewhere; he gives a strong feeling of deformity, although I couldn't specify the point.” (Stevenson, 1979, p. 48). Hyde is also described in the text in terms that make him sound more animalistic than human “Hence the apelike tricks that he would play me,” (Stevenson, 1979, p. 85), another call to him being less evolved and less human than the educated and ostensibly moral Jekyll. This may be an intentional choice on Stevenson’s part to make clear to the original readers that Hyde was inherently evil by calling on their existing beliefs to do the work for him (Barrett, 2012b).

When discussing science in the Victorian era it is important to take into consideration the way religion was impacted by the scientific discoveries being made. On The Origin Of Species was published by Charles Darwin in 1859 and directly contradicted the Bible’s story of the creation of the Earth, fueling the panic over science corrupting moral and religious values (English Heritage, 2019). However, religion also plays a more direct role in the plot of Jekyll and Hyde. The central concept of Jekyll’s story, the need to hide any evil or sinful thoughts and actions, is an idea preached by the Christian church (Piper, 2022). The Bible states that humans should “Put to death, therefore, whatever belongs to your earthly nature: sexual immorality, impurity, lust, evil desires and greed, which is idolatry.” (“Bible”, 1978, 3:1-25) an idea that Jekyll most likely internalised due to the Christian environment of Britain at the time (English Heritage, 2019).

Jekyll’s immoral behaviour within the story of Jekyll and Hyde is specifically facilitated by the science he performs, which puts his religious beliefs at odds with his scientific abilities and the supernatural creation of Hyde. This conflict is manifested within the story by Jekyll attempting to make amends for his sins by turning to religion “He came out of his seclusion [..] and whilst he had always been known for charities, he was now no less distinguished for religion.” (Stevenson, 1979, p. 75) and by Hyde’s disdain for Jekyll’s religious texts “Hence the apelike tricks that he would play me, scrawling in my own hand blasphemies on the pages of my books,” (Stevenson, 1979, p. 85). As Jekyll’s scientific exploits cause him so much trouble within the book and eventually lead to his death, the whole story and more specifically Hyde’s hatred for religion could be seen as a condemnation of science by Stevenson. However, the role Christian societal and religious beliefs played in Jekyll’s downfall could also serve as a criticism of religions and cultures that encourage people to suppress their emotions.

Jekyll and Hyde shows the complicated relationships between science, religion and supernatural beliefs in the Victorian era and how the major religious beliefs in Britain at the time were being threatened by science and the sin it enabled. However, the character of Lanyon shows that science can be used for good as long as the wielder is restrained. Ultimately, Stevenson’s societal commentary remains relevant centuries later, which is partially due to his effective use of common themes such as science and religion to explore the theme of morality. The themes of Jekyll and Hyde are particularly relevant to the Victorian era when the suppression of unseemly qualities was more expected and religion was more prevalent, but the fundamental conflict of morality with progress is so well written as to be timeless.

Social media filter bubbles are the isolation from opposing opinions and viewpoints online that is primarily caused by consumer choice but is also driven by platform algorithms. Echo chambers are a similar but better-known concept that rely more on consumer selection while filter bubbles rely more on platform facilitation, but for concision the distinctions will not be explored in this essay. Instead, this essay will use a viewpoint drawing from the Culture Industry, Functionalist, and Reinforcement theories to explain the two main factors in the creation of filter bubbles — consumer and platform behaviour — and then examine the real-world prevalence of filter bubbles and their implications regarding far-right extremist content.

The basic conceit of Reinforcement theory is that consumers expose themselves to and retain content that they agree with while avoiding or detaching from content that challenges their beliefs, a concept known as selective exposure and retention (Klapper, 1957). This is an understandable ego-defence mechanism as it stops the consumer from ever having to be wrong and experience the uncomfortable emotions that would induce. Selective exposure occurs with all media but is particularly easy on social media due to the amount of content available to consumers and the ease with which upsetting content can be avoided. Users may be drawn specifically to extremist content online, as discussed by Reed et al. (2021), because it generally creates a strong emotional response that involves the idea that their beliefs are under attack and draws on the same defensiveness that powers selective exposure. Reinforcement theory is therefore an effective explanation for the consumer side of filter bubbles. However, as Pariser (2011) showed, companies also play a role in the creation of filter bubbles due to prioritizing content that receives high engagement from consumers.

Two theories can, when combined, explain the two main reasons that drive companies under capitalism to use algorithms to reinforce filter bubbles — making money and wasting consumer’s time. From a Functionalist perspective, businesses exist to generate profit for their shareholders (Costa et al., 2025) and filter bubbles are an effective tool for doing so. As previously mentioned, inflammatory content provokes heightened defensiveness and investment from consumers due to its emotional nature. It then receives high user engagement, in terms of both time spent on a post and energy expended through methods such as liking and commenting, making it very profitable for the social media platform. This causes a cycle where the company is incentivised to continue showing the same variety of content to the consumer, who then falls deeper into the filter bubble and becomes more invested. Culture Industry theory explains why even without a direct monetary incentive, companies design systems to waste consumer’s time. When leisure time is spent satisfying the implanted need for a constant stream of engaging content to consume, it cannot be used to change the status quo or the capitalist system (Adorno, 1991).

The consumer and platform incentives for creating filter bubbles are now obvious, but their implications have not yet been discussed. Filter bubbles can easily lead to consumers seeing extremely aggressive far-right content such as in the case study shown in Reed et al. (2021) which proved that YouTube’s ‘recommended feed’ of videos can quickly turn aggressively conservative after only minimal interest in such topics is expressed by the user. There is less research regarding far-left content bubbles, possibly due to them being less prevalent although further research would be required to ascertain the exact cause. A possible benefit of these filter bubbles would be a furthering of the Culture Industry’s theory about wasting leisure time to prevent class conflict (Adorno, 1991), as right-wing content typically supports the current socioeconomic order and is pro-businesses. Regardless of why these far-right bubbles are being created, they may further the ideological segregation that can be created by social media news consumption (Flaxman et al., 2016) and possibly lead to violence. Online content leading to offline violence may seem unlikely, but there is proof that Facebook’s algorithm promoting “hate speech and misinformation” incited violence during the 2017 Rohingya crisis in Myanmar (Cetinkaya, 2025).

Social media filter bubbles are evidently a real phenomenon created from a combination of consumer input and algorithmic reinforcement, although they tend to be created regarding far-right content specifically as opposed to any other political or social viewpoint. The role of the consumer in creating filter bubbles can be explained with Reinforcement theory, as they wish to consume content that matches their existing beliefs and ignore content that does not. Platform algorithms such as YouTube that favour filter bubbles do so because of Culture Industry theory and Functionalism. Companies need to take up the leisure time of consumers with implanted needs in order to prevent social change, as well as being required to make ever-increasing amounts of money under capitalism and therefore creating filter bubbles of increasing intensity for consumers. Filter bubbles have an overall negative effect on society and ultimately serve capitalism and the interests of companies while promoting ideological segregation and causing real danger and violence. Possible attempts to prevent filter bubbles would likely have to focus on regulating companies and the way their algorithms recommend content rather than attempting to force consumers to cultivate a balanced media diet.

Romanticisation is a term that describes when something, such as a mental illness, is portrayed in a very positive and desirable way while downplaying the negative aspects. It may result from the modern de-stigmatisation of mental illness and the way that it has become more normalised in society. Romanticisation affects different disorders and classes of disorder differently due to their varying levels of stigma and the different symptoms which may seem more or less desirable. Major depressive disorder is a highly romanticised illness, especially online by young people who view it as aesthetic. On the other hand, bipolar disorder is romanticised primarily by adults and society offline through overly positive stereotyping. Both varieties of romanticisation can cause harm to patients and involve a high degree of at least semi-intentional ignorance towards negative or undesirable symptoms, but also have their own unique traits.

Bipolar disorders, such as cyclothymia and Bipolar I and II, are often romanticised as a unique form of artistic genius and hyperproductivity in media and in real life. Ponticiello (2024) shows a case study of the writer being told by a professor that people with bipolar are “more likely to be musicians, artists, and writers”. This overly positive perception in conventional media and real life can also affect online spaces, such as another case study where two users online self-diagnosed with bipolar due to it being romanticised as involving “heightened energy, creativity, and power” (Ndour & Foulkes, 2025). It is true that hypomania can make an individual highly productive and energetic, leading to high performance in school and in the workplace. Many people around a patient may consider these positive effects to outweigh the depressive component of the disorder despite how heavy of a toll it can take on the patient, such as struggles with suicidality and feelings of emptiness or ungratefulness for being mentally ill despite having an ostensibly good life (Ponticiello, 2024). This may lead a patient to feel unsupported and alone with their illness, which will further harm their mental health and any attempts they are making at treating their mental illness.

Depression experiences a similar form of romanticisation where being mentally ill is considered to be a gateway to new levels of artistic expression and genius. Thelandersson (2017) examines the concept of the ‘sad girl’, a term on the social media platforms Tumblr and Instagram that likely includes both depressed people and people who have been sucked into the community by the sanitised and aspirational picture of depression it paints. Portrayals of depression in the ‘sad girl’ community are aesthetic and desirable with relatable or sad quotes overlaid onto pictures of sad women and scars. Mia’s case study mentions that she sees similar content online, with “videos where sadness looks peaceful or even meaningful”. Depression and self-harm are discussed in these communities in a casual or sarcastic way that does not portray them as something to be cured (Thelandersson, 2017), but instead shows them as Mia’s idea that sadness is a “fundamental part of who she is”. Portrayals of drugs such as Xanax and mentions of therapy are also common in ‘sad girl’ communities, leading to the shared view of depression as something that can be treated but not cured, and should instead be treated as a beautiful and amusingly inconvenient part of everyday life (Thelandersson, 2017). Aspects of depression such as the neglect of hygiene and physical health or the social isolation that Mia experiences are not shown, due to the way romanticisation relies on ignoring the harsh realities of a mental illness in order to make it palatable. This may harm the mental health of depressed individuals who do not see their struggles represented online in these ‘sad girl’ spaces and feel more isolated and somehow ‘wrong’.

The romanticisation of depression primarily affects teenagers, which may be due to the fact that it is more prevalent on social media than offline but may also connect to their stronger drive to find community. In contrast, the romanticisation of bipolar relies more heavily on longstanding stereotypes and preconceptions about mania and continues to impact individuals such as the writer of Ponticiello (2024) into their adult lives and careers. While bipolar and cyclothymia experience a stronger push towards the artistic genius stereotype, there is an idea that is expressed both by Mia in her role of a “quiet, artistic identity” and in Thelandersson’s (2017) definition of melancholia, of depression characterised by longing that creates profound and meaningful art. Both forms of romanticisation may lead to patients feeling like they are not experiencing mental illness ‘correctly’ if they are struggling and to change or push themselves to fit in with stereotypes like Mia does, such as how the writer of Ponticiello (2024) is uncomfortable with the way their mania is glorified by those around them but still attempts to live up to these expectations with their successful university work and academic publishing.

The romanticisation of bipolar and depression can therefore be said to primarily centre artistic potential and beauty while downplaying the negative effects on a person’s mental state or physical health. Bipolar disorder is romanticised by society at large in a way that burdens patients with the need to live up to their supposed potential, while depression has a negative perception in real life but is heavily aestheticised online and by the younger generation. Romanticisation leads to feelings of inadequacy and inability to live up to unrealistic expectations, especially when even typical expectations may seem unachievable. However, it is important to note that much of the existing research on romanticisation is qualitative rather than quantitative such as Ponticiello (2024), and that further research on the online romanticisation of depression for boys would supplement Thelandersson’s (2017) work well to create a more well-rounded view. It would also be beneficial to explore romanticisation of bipolar online or depression in real life, to provide more accurate comparisons regarding how the medium of romanticisation changes the age demographic it reaches and the effects it has on individuals.
